Unit 10: IT skills. Lesson 1.B. Basics of e-learning

--- OSON ---

1. Reported speech - bu nima?
A) Kelasi zamonni ifodalash usuli
B) Grammatik vaqtlarni o'rganish bo'limi
C) Faqat savol gaplar tuzish usuli
+D) Birovning gapini o'z so'zlarimiz bilan qayta aytish

2. To'g'ridan-to'g'ri nutqni reported speech ga aylantirishda "said" so'zidan keyin odatda qaysi bog'lovchi ishlatiladi?
A) if
+B) that
C) when
D) because

3. Reported speech ga o'tishda "will" fe'li odatda qaysi so'zga o'zgaradi?
A) must
B) can
+C) would
D) shall

4. Present Continuous zamoni ("is surfing" kabi) reported speech da qaysi zamonga o'zgaradi?
A) Past Simple
+B) Past Continuous
C) Present Perfect
D) Future Simple

5. Present Perfect zamoni ("have sent" kabi) reported speech da qaysi zamonga o'zgaradi?
A) Past Simple
B) Present Simple
C) Future Perfect
+D) Past Perfect

6. Buyruq gap ("Stop downloading!" kabi) reported speech ga o'tganda fe'l qanday shaklga o'zgaradi?
A) fe'lning 3-shakli
+B) to + fe'l (infinitiv)
C) o'zgarishsiz qoladi
D) fe'l + ing

7. Insho yozishda "In addition" iborasi qanday maqsadda ishlatiladi?
A) Fikrni yakunlash uchun
B) Qarama-qarshi fikr bildirish uchun
C) Shaxsiy fikr bildirish uchun
+D) Qo'shimcha fikr qo'shish uchun

8. "In conclusion" iborasi inshoning qaysi qismida ishlatiladi?
A) Kirish qismida
B) Asosiy qism boshida
+C) Yakunlovchi qismida
D) Har bir paragraf boshida

9. "First of all" iborasi qanday ma'noni bildiradi?
A) Xulosa
+B) Birinchi navbatda
C) Shaxsiy fikr
D) Qarama-qarshilik

10. "I disagree that ..." iborasi insho yozishda nimani ifodalaydi?
A) Xulosa chiqarishni
B) Faktni tasdiqlashni
+C) Qarshi fikr/rozi bo'lmaslikni
D) Qo'shimcha fikrni

--- O'RTACHA ---

11. "Hackers attacked our school computers and stole important data" - the student said. Gapni reported speech ga to'g'ri o'tkazilgan variantini tanlang.
A) The student said hackers will attack school computers.
B) The student said that hackers attack our school computers and steal important data.
C) The student says that hackers attack our school computers and steal important data.
+D) The student said that hackers had attacked their school computers and had stolen important data.

12. "My computer isn't functioning well" - Jamil said. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) Jamil says that my computer isn't functioning well.
B) Jamil said that his computer will not function well.
+C) Jamil said that his computer wasn't functioning well.
D) Jamil said that her computer wasn't functioning well.

13. "Nodira is surfing the Net at the moment" - the teacher said. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) The teacher said that Nodira surfs the Net at that moment.
+B) The teacher said that Nodira was surfing the Net at that moment.
C) The teacher said that Nodira is surfing the Net at that moment.
D) The teacher said that Nodira had surfed the Net.

14. "My mother never watches reality shows" - Sarvinoz said. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
+A) Sarvinoz said that her mother never watched reality shows.
B) Sarvinoz said that her mother never watches reality shows.
C) Sarvinoz said that her mother had never watched reality shows.
D) Sarvinoz said that my mother never watches reality shows.

15. "Cyber bullying is increasing all over the world" - our teacher said. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) Our teacher said that cyber bullying increases all over the world.
B) Our teacher said that cyber bullying will increase all over the world.
C) Our teacher said that cyber bullying is increasing all over the world.
+D) Our teacher said that cyber bullying was increasing all over the world.

16. "Stop downloading those films! It's illegal" - his brother told him. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
+A) His brother told him to stop downloading those films because it was illegal.
B) His brother told him stop downloading those films because it was illegal.
C) His brother told him that stop downloading those films.
D) His brother said to him stopping downloading those films.

17. "Why doesn't this computer work?" - the teacher asked us. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) The teacher asked us why didn't that computer work.
B) The teacher asked why does this computer work.
+C) The teacher asked us why that computer didn't work.
D) The teacher asked us why this computer doesn't work.

18. "Have you sent her an e-mail?" - the boy asked. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) The boy asked if she sent her an e-mail.
B) The boy asked whether has she sent her an e-mail.
C) The boy asked did she send her an e-mail.
+D) The boy asked if she had sent her an e-mail.

19. "Did you install the antivirus I bought yesterday?" gapida qatnashgan "yesterday" so'zi reported speech ga o'tganda qaysi so'zga o'zgaradi?
+A) the day before
B) the next day
C) today
D) that day

20. Reported speech ga o'tganda "this" ko'rsatish olmoshi odatda qaysi so'zga o'zgaradi?
A) it
+B) that
C) those
D) these

--- QIYIN ---

21. "Hadn't you already installed one before?" - my mother asked. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) My mother asked whether I haven't already installed one before.
B) My mother asked if I had already installed one before.
+C) My mother asked if I hadn't already installed one before.
D) My mother asked if I didn't install one before.

22. "Was she sending mails when the headmaster arrived?" - Rakhim asked. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
+A) Rakhim asked if she had been sending mails when the headmaster had arrived.
B) Rakhim asked if she was sending mails when the headmaster arrived.
C) Rakhim asked whether she sent mails when the headmaster had arrived.
D) Rakhim asked if she has been sending mails when the headmaster arrives.

23. "Nasim has been playing computer games since 10 in the morning" - her mother said. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) Her mother said that Nasim had played computer games from 10 in the morning.
B) Her mother said that Nasim has been playing computer games since 10 in the morning.
C) Her mother said that Nasim was playing computer games since 10 in the morning.
+D) Her mother said that Nasim had been playing computer games since 10 in the morning.

24. "Did she download the necessary files last week?" - the teacher asked. Zamon va vaqt so'zi to'g'ri o'zgartirilgan reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) The teacher asked if she downloaded the necessary files last week.
B) The teacher asked did she download the files the previous week.
+C) The teacher asked if she had downloaded the necessary files the previous week.
D) The teacher asked whether she has downloaded the necessary files last week.

25. "What is the URL of the new site you told me about?" - Farrukh asked. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) Farrukh asked what the URL of the new site is that she told him about.
B) Farrukh asked what is the URL of the new site I told him about.
+C) Farrukh asked what the URL of the new site she had told him about was.
D) Farrukh asked what was the URL of the new site you told me about.

26. "What are you copying and pasting from the Net?" - my mother asked me. To'g'ri reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) My mother asked me what was I copying and pasting from the Net.
B) My mother asked me what she was copying and pasting from the Net.
+C) My mother asked me what I was copying and pasting from the Net.
D) My mother asked me what I am copying and pasting from the Net.

27. "Did you install the antivirus I bought yesterday?" - my father asked. Barcha elementlar (zamon, olmosh, vaqt so'zi) to'g'ri o'zgartirilgan reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) My father asked if he install the antivirus I bought yesterday.
B) My father asked if I installed the antivirus I bought yesterday.
C) My father asked that I had installed the antivirus he bought yesterday.
+D) My father asked if I had installed the antivirus he had bought the day before.

28. "The speed of the Internet will be better tomorrow" - said the technician. Modal fe'l va vaqt so'zi to'g'ri o'zgartirilgan reported speech variantini tanlang.
A) The technician said that the speed of the Internet is better tomorrow.
+B) The technician said that the speed of the Internet would be better the next day.
C) The technician said that the speed of the Internet will be better tomorrow.
D) The technician said that the speed of the Internet would be better tomorrow.

29. "Nasim has been playing computer games since 10 in the morning" gapida nega Present Perfect Continuous zamoni ishlatilgan?
A) Chunki harakat faqat bir marta sodir bo'lgan
+B) Chunki harakat o'tmishda boshlangan va hozirgacha davom etmoqda
C) Chunki harakat hozir tugagan va natijasi yo'q
D) Chunki harakat kelajakda sodir bo'ladi

30. "Was she sending mails when the headmaster arrived?" gapini reported speech ga o'tkazishda ikki fe'lning zamoni qanday o'zgaradi?
A) Ikkisi ham o'zgarishsiz qoladi
B) Was sending -> is sending, arrived -> arrives
+C) Was sending -> had been sending, arrived -> had arrived
D) Ikkisi ham Past Perfect Continuous ga o'zgaradi
